Io threads blog (#102)
valkey-io/valkey-io.github.io: content/blog/2024-07-07-aws-to-contribute-efficiency-improvements-for-ValKey-8.md

Larger shards can alleviate these constraints by accommodating more keys and larger collections within a single node.

While larger shards offer these benefits, they come with trade-offs.
Full synchronization for very large instances can be risky, and losing a large shard can be more impactful than losing a smaller one.
Conversely, managing a cluster with too many small instances can be operationally complex.
The optimal configuration depends on the specific workload, requiring a careful balance between scaling out and using larger shards.

### Major Upgrade to Valkey Performance
Starting with version 8, Valkey users will benefit from an increase in multi-threaded performance, thanks to a new multi-threading architecture that can boost throughput and reduce latency on a wide range of hardware types.
![Performance comparison between existing I/O threading implementation and the new I/O threading implementation available in Valkey 8.](/assets/media/pictures/performance_comparison.png)

The data demonstrates a substantial performance improvement with the new I/O threads approach.

> Throughput increased by approximately 230%, rising from 360K to 1.19M requests per second.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Throughput increased by approximately 230%, rising from 360K to 1.19M requests per second compared to Valkey 7.2
```

+++
# `title` is how your post will be listed and what will appear at the top of the post

> title= "Unlock 1 Million RPS:  Experience Triple the Speed with Valkey 8.0 "

Reviewer: I like this name.

Reviewer 2: The title is a bit confusing since Valkey 8.0 isn't being announced with this blog - suggest re-wording.

Reviewer 2: Consider updating the title since this is not an announcement blog of Valkey 8.0.

# `date` is when your post will be published.
# For the most part, you can leave this as the day you _started_ the post.
# The maintainers will update this value before publishing
# The time is generally irrelvant in how Valkey published, so '01:01:01' is a good placeholder
date= 2024-07-08 01:01:01
# 'description' is what is shown as a snippet/summary in various contexts.
# You can make this the first few lines of the post or (better) a hook for readers.
# Aim for 2 short sentences.
description= "Better efficiency reduces cost, improves latency and makes our environment greener"
# 'authors' are the folks who wrote or contributed to the post.
# Each author corresponds to a biography file (more info later in this document)
authors= [ "dantouitou", "uriyagelnik"]
+++
Valkey, the popular open-source key-value store that succeeded OSS Redis, captures the imagination of developers around the world.
From simple in-memory caching implementations to complex job queues, real-time collaboration, and leaderboard applications, we at AWS are continually amazed by how innovatively users employ Valkey.
Clearly, this is just the tip of the iceberg.

> As more use cases and industries seek to benefit from the speed, low latency, and cost reduction advantages of in-memory processing as introduced by Valkey, we are fully committed to our vision of delivering exceptional performance.

Reviewer 3: I do think we need an intro paragraph of some kind. This is a bit too broad and does not tell the reader what to expect in the article or what actions they should expect to take. I would like to see something here like "Read on to learn more about upcoming features as part of Valkey 8.0 release in September 2024." in addition to an overview sentence or two about the project/contributions. Let's drop the subtitle for this section.

> As more use cases and industries seek to benefit from the speed, low latency, and cost reduction advantages of in-memory processing as introduced by Valkey, we are fully committed to our vision of delivering exceptional performance.

Reviewer 2: minor nit, open source should not have a dash

### Our Commitment to performance and efficiency
At AWS, we have hundreds of thousands of customers using Amazon ElastiCache and Amazon MemoryDB.
Feedback we continuously hear from customers is that they need better absolute performance and squeeze more performance from their clusters.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This led us down a path of improving the multi-threaded performance of our ElastiCache and MemoryDB services, through a feature we called Enhanced IO [maybe some links to blog posts]. ?
Today we are excited to dive into how we are sharing our learnings from this performance journey by contributing a major performance improvement to the Valkey project.
```

For absolute performance per node, customers sometimes have hot keys or other limitation that prevents them from scaling out.
They also need better latencies at high percentiles.
For efficiency, we see customers trying to optimize their costs and get more out of their boxes.

Besides performance, we also see efficiency as a way to improve resilience.
For example, with fork-based snapshotting and full-sync replication, the longer it takes, the more memory is consumed by copied-on-write pages and the replica output buffer, often resulting in high swapping and erratic behavior.

> By reducing execution time, one can achieve a more predictable memory usage and greater stability.

Reviewer: I have another comment suggesting we move `### Benefits of High Capacity Shards` here. If you take that, I think this text should moved into that paragraph.

Author: Done

### Major Upgrade to Valkey Performance

We are excited to contribute  our major performance improvements and expertise to Valkey.
Starting with version 8, Valkey users will benefit from a significant increase in performance, thanks to a new multi-threading implementation that can boost throughput and latency on a wide range of hardware types.

![I/O threads high level design](/assets/media/pictures/performance_comparison.png)

> The data demonstrates a substantial performance improvement with the new I/O threads approach.

Reviewer: Let's also include the setup here in text so folks can see it without having to read the image description.

Throughput increased by approximately 230%, rising from 360K to 1.19M requests per second.

> Latency metrics improved across all percentiles, with average latency decreasing by 69.8% from 1.792 ms to 0.542 ms. 

Reviewer: Let's include the test setup in text as well, both for accessibility and for search ability.

> ### Benefits of High Capacity Shards

Reviewer: I think this paragraph is good, but just in the wrong place. I think we should move it up above `### Major Upgrade to Valkey Performance`.

Valkey's common approach to performance and memory improvement is scaling out by adding more shards to the cluster. 
However, the availability of more powerful nodes offers additional flexibility in application design. 

> Higher-capacity shards can increase cluster capacity, improve resilience to request surges, and simplify key distribution for multi-key transactions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Higher-capacity shards can increase cluster capacity, improve resilience to request surges and provide scaling for hot keys and large collections that can't be addressed by scaling alone. . 
```

I don't know what "simplify key distribution for multi-key transactions" means. So I think we should just merge these two sentence.s

They also provide solutions for hot keys and large collections that can't be addressed by scaling out alone.
While larger shards offer these benefits, they come with trade-offs. 
Full synchronization for very large instances can be risky, and losing a large shard can be more impactful than losing a smaller one. 
Conversely, managing a cluster with too many small instances can be operationally complex.
The optimal configuration depends on the specific workload, requiring a careful balance between scaling out and using larger shards.

### Performance Without Compromising Simplicity

> Implementing multi-threading can be a complex task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Not sure this sentence adds much.

+++
# `title` is how your post will be listed and what will appear at the top of the post
title= "Unlock 1 Million RPS: Experience Triple the Speed with Valkey"
# `date` is when your post will be published.
# For the most part, you can leave this as the day you _started_ the post.
# The maintainers will update this value before publishing
# The time is generally irrelvant in how Valkey published, so '01:01:01' is a good placeholder
date= 2024-07-08 01:01:01
# 'description' is what is shown as a snippet/summary in various contexts.
# You can make this the first few lines of the post or (better) a hook for readers.
# Aim for 2 short sentences.
description= "Better efficiency reduces cost, improves latency and makes our environment greener"
# 'authors' are the folks who wrote or contributed to the post.
# Each author corresponds to a biography file (more info later in this document)
authors= [ "dantouitou", "uriyagelnik"]
+++

> Valkey 8.0, set for release in September 2024, brings major performance enhancements through improved multi-threading.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Valkey 8.0, set for release in September 2024, will bring major performance enhancements through a variety of improvements including a new multi-threaded architecture.
```

This update aims to significantly boost throughput and reduce latency across various hardware configurations.

> Read on to learn more about the upcoming features in Valkey 8.0, including the innovative I/O threading implementation and its impact on performance and efficiency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read on to learn more about the new innovative I/O threading implementation and its impact on performance and efficiency.
```

### Our Commitment to performance and efficiency
At AWS, we have hundreds of thousands of customers using Amazon ElastiCache and Amazon MemoryDB.
Feedback we continuously hear from end users is that they need better absolute performance and want to squeeze more performance from their clusters.

For absolute performance per node, users sometimes face challenges with hot keys or other limitations that prevent them from scaling out.
They also need better latencies at high percentiles.
For efficiency, users are constantly trying to optimize their costs and get more out of their hardware.

Besides performance, efficiency is also seen as a way to improve resilience.
For example, with fork-based snapshotting and full-sync replication, the longer it takes, the more memory is consumed by copied-on-write pages and the replica output buffer, often resulting in high swapping and erratic behavior.

> By reducing execution time, one can achieve a more predictable memory usage and greater stability.

Reviewer: I still find these two paragraphs really awkward and a lot of what they are saying is already explained elsewhere. The second one is especially a tangent for fork-based snapshot. It doesn't feel like it fits into the narrative well. I know Itay wanted to include reliability in the narrative, I just don't think we are covering it well enough to explain it. Maybe I'll wait for Itay to comment about it.

Reviewer 4: In addition to hotkeys, Valkey users with multi-key operations (mget and co) have to ensure that all keys in such operations are located in the same slot. In many cases, the result is that they are using a small number of slots and consequently are restricted on how much their cluster can scale. These users are often looking for larger , more powerful shards

Reviewer: I guess after reflecting on it some more, I'm inclined to say we should really lean in on the single key/slot use case and say we are accelerating that. We already have a section dedicated to the benefit of bigger shards, so maybe we can move the first paragraph + Dan's added use case there.

Author: I have removed the sentences about performance and efficiency and added Dan's wording to the "Benefits of High Capacity Shards" section.
